Batch Size
Definition: Number of samples processed before the model is updated.

If batch_size = 2, the model will:
Take 2 images.
Run them through the model.
Compute the loss.
Update weights using the average loss from those 2 images.

✅ Bigger batch size:
Pros: More stable gradients, better GPU utilization.
Cons: Uses more GPU memory, can require gradient accumulation if memory is tight.

✅ Smaller batch size:
Pros: Lower memory usage, useful if GPU memory is limited.
Cons: Noisier gradients, slower convergence.
➡️ Rule of thumb: Start small (e.g., 2–8) and increase only if you have free GPU memory.




⚙️ Num Workers
Definition: Number of subprocesses used by the DataLoader to load data in parallel.
Default is 0 (loads data in the main process, slowest).
If num_workers = 4, four parallel Python workers load data while your GPU trains the model.

✅ More workers:
Pros: Faster data loading, especially with many small files or heavy image transforms.
Cons: Too many workers can cause RAM overload or OS-level slowdowns (especially on Windows).

➡️ Rule of thumb:

On Linux/macOS: Set it to number of CPU cores or (CPU cores // 2)
On Windows: Start with 0 or 2, Windows multiprocessing can be tricky



🧪 Example Setup for You:
If your machine has:
8 CPU cores
8–16 GB of RAM
8 GB GPU

Then you could set:
train:
  batch_size: 2 to 4
  num_workers: 4

“The optimal batch size is the largest batch that fits in memory”
— PyTorch Forum Reference

“num_workers > 0 enables multi-process data loading. Best number depends on CPU cores and memory.”
— PyTorch Dataloader Docs




Other configs for dataloader:

🔁 shuffle
Type: bool (True or False)
Purpose: Randomize the order of samples in each epoch.

✅ Why it's useful:
Prevents the model from learning the order of data (helps generalization).

Especially important for training, not needed for validation or testing.

🔧 Example:
shuffle=True  # Good for training
shuffle=False # Use for validation/test to keep consistent evaluation



📌 pin_memory
Type: bool
Purpose: Makes data transfer from CPU to GPU faster.

✅ When to use:
Use pin_memory=True if you’re training on a GPU (which you are).

“Pinned” memory (a.k.a. page-locked) enables faster copies to CUDA

🔧 Example:
pin_memory=True  # Recommended if using a GPU



🧩 collate_fn
Type: function
Purpose: Merges a list of samples into a mini-batch.

🔍 Why you need it:
PyTorch's default collate_fn doesn't work with detection/segmentation data because the targets (masks, boxes, etc.) vary per image.

You must define a custom collate function for variable-sized inputs.